---
layout: post
title: glCombat - Week 2 - Projectiles & Explosions
tags: opengl gamedev c development
author: Steve SCHNEPP
---

Another week has passed. But this time, things have slowed down as real life
took its toll. Focus was on the projectiles and their explosions.

## A projectile primer

### Moving with Gravity and Drag

Animating a projectile is rather simple. You set its initial position and velocity.

Then each frame, you move the projectile by the travelled distance. This is
computed as the velocity multiplied by the time.

It is not totally accurate, but given than the frames are short enough and
it is a game not a simulator, it is fine.

Each frame you also have to modify the velocity to take gravity into
account, along with drag. Again this is done with the same technique.
Gravity and drag vectors are added to the velocity vector, with a factor
that depends on the time.

This is known as [integration](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Integral), and
is a fundamental mathematical construct. It is used to convert acceleration
into speed into distance. Note that we only approximate the real value with
that technique.
{: .panel .tip }

Gravity is a constant vector, aimed down. Drag is depending on the velocity,
and directly opposed. So instead of complex computation, we'll apply
gravitation first, and drag is done via a simple constant multiplication
that is smaller than 1.

Note that the drag is usually quadratic to the speed. Which means a factor
of the speed squared. But as a first step we'll pretend it is linear only.
{: .panel .note }

### Collision

At the end of the projectile course there is usually a collision. For now
only the collision with the map is handled.

The algorithm is very simple :
* move the projectile
* if the projectile is below the height of the map, it does explode.
* loop

Computing the height of the map at a (x,y) point is tricky, as the quad is
not a plane. We cut it in 4 triangles last week.  For a first appromixation,
we simpy take the heighest vertex of the quad and use that for the whole
quad. It works well enough, except for high slopes.
{: .panel .info }

## Explosions

Explosions are very simple: a *translucent expanding sphere*.

It works rather well, as it enables to modulate

* the *blast radius*, with the final size of the explosion
* the *damage*, with the alpha transparency. More powerful, more opaque.

That provides an immediate visual clue of both. Testing will tell if it my
idea is accurate.

### Small Performance Improvement

The biggest time consumer is the map drawing. I managed to improve by 30% moving from `glVertex3f(x, y, z);` to `glVertex3fv(v);`.

As `struct v3f` was already similar in memory than the required `float v[3]` a simple cast did the trick to hide the magic from the outside.

```c
static inline float* v3f_to_f3v(struct v3f *v) {
	return (float *) v; // Raw cast
}
```

and the usage becomes

```c
	float *n = v3f_to_f3v(& o->vertices_normal[vertice_normal_idx]);
	glNormal3fv(n);
```
