---
layout: post
title: 1OPS - One Operation Per Statement
tags: best-practices development
author: Steve SCHNEPP
---

The 1OPS principle is the single principle that had the biggest impact in my entire
coding career. I gave some hints about it in [a previous post]({% post_url
2022-09-18-always-optimize-for-dummies %}#sloc), but I was suggested that it
might warrant a post on its own to go more in depth.

Now, according to my [Immutability Rules]({% post_url 2023-07-20-update-or-new
%}), I will update the previous one with a pointer to this one.

## Principle

The basic idea is very simple :

Only One Operation per Statement
{: .box .info .small-caps }

### Rationale for the rule

The rationale is _very simple_ and based on the fact that :

__Naming__ things is what helps __understanding__.
{: .panel .info }

A statement is the building block of code. It is a cohesive entity.  It is
usually in the form of `dst = statement(src_1, ... , src_N)`[^1]. The
`statement()` being possibly very complex. As soon as you combine multiple
operations in that function, the compiler will create automatic anonymous
temporary variables.

[^1]: It is even __exactly__ how the vast majority of RISC-V
      instructions are designed.

That automatic creation mechanism is at fault for quick understanding : when
you read a statement, you need to keep all the automatic anonymous temporary
variables in your mind while trying to understand the code. Therefore avoiding
them is very helpful.

The __1OPS__ idea is the __same idea__ that says functions
shall do only one __single thing and have a meaningful name__.
{: .panel .tip }

In the same vein, __anonymous functions are also discouraged__, as I'm
predicting some downturn in lambda functions. They do have their use, but right
now they are still too hyped and we don't have enough feedback via painful
maintenance. Which is the whole point of this article: _unlocking very simple
maintenance_. I do not focus on any short term gains that modern syntax sugar
gives me. Instead I really focus on long term readability gains that this rule
gives me.

## The rule explained

In order of importance:
1. A single operation per statement
1. Explicit temporary variable names
1. Scope change is an operation
1. Unit/encoding change is an operation

### Single operation per statement

Every statement does consists of __only 1 operation.__ It can have as many parameters as
needed. But it needs to be a single operation. For example, an addition with
2 parameters, and AND logic operation with 3 parameters or a OR bitwise
operation with 5 parameters. We can have multiple of the same.

```java
    good_example = var1 + var2;
    good_example = var1 && var2 && var3;
    good_example = MASK_1 | MASK_2 | MASK_3 | MASK_4 | MASK_5;

    bad_example = var1 + var2 - var3;
    bad_example = MASK_1 | MASK_2 & MASK_5;
```

If you __need to think__ to remember the operation order, it is __too complex__.
As one operation type always executes from left to right[^2].
{: .panel .tip }

[^2]: This is not true for unary operations, but let's not blur the message. <br/>
      A common (and valid) conversion to boolean is `value_as_boolean = !!value`.

### Explicit names for every operation outcomes

Every operation is assigned to a temporary variable that has an __explicit and
meaningful name__. This enables to follow what is done very nicely as it
reduce the content that a reader needs to keep in mind.

```java
    uint32_t bswap(uint32_t i) {
            return (i >> 24) | ((i >> 8) & 0x0000FF00) | ((i << 8) & 0x00FF0000) | (i << 24);
    }

    uint32_t bswap_1ops(uint32_t i) {
            uint8_t i3 = i >> 24;
            uint8_t i2 = i >> 16;
            uint8_t i1 = i >>  8;
            uint8_t i0 = i >>  0;

            uint32_t r0 = i3 <<  0;
            uint32_t r1 = i2 <<  8;
            uint32_t r2 = i1 << 16;
            uint32_t r3 = i0 << 24;

            uint32_t r = r0 | r1 | r2 | r3;

            return r;
    }
```

Both gets complied to the same binary code, but the 2nd one is much more easy
to read for a newcomer. And it conveys nicely the type of intermediate
variables.

```asm
    bswap:
            mov     eax, edi
            bswap   eax
            ret
    bswap_1ops:
            mov     eax, edi
            bswap   eax
            ret
```

### Scope is Meaningful

Assignments to temporary variables don't count towards the 1OPS, but
assignments towards ones with a different scope do.
Ideally the variable names are different.

```java
int player_x;
int player_y

void update(int dx, int dy) {
    int new_player_x = player_x + dx;
    int new_player_y = player_y + dy;

    int clamped_player_x = middle(MIN_X, new_player_x, MAX_X);
    int clamped_player_y = middle(MIN_Y, new_player_y, MAX_Y);

    player_x = clamped_player_x;
    player_y = clamped_player_y;
}
```

Here `player_x` is the global variable. And the algorithm is very simple to understand :
1. We compute the new value
1. then clamp it
1. and finally update the global variable.

This enables to have almost atomic changes at the end of the function. Every
temporary variable is locally scoped to the function. Scope changes are in only
one place : in the beginning for reading from global, and and the end when
writing to global.

A function can then evolve from _pure function_ that has no side effects to a
_mutable function_ that changes global state variables. Note that changing a
member of a struct is also a scope change such as:

```java
struct player {
    int x, y;
}

void update(struct player *p, int dx, int dy) {
    p->x += dx;
    p->y += dy;
}

void update_with_clamping(struct player *p, int dx, int dy) {
    int new_player_x = p->x + dx;
    int new_player_y = p->y + dy;

    int clamped_player_x = middle(MIN_X, new_player_x, MAX_X);
    int clamped_player_y = middle(MIN_Y, new_player_y, MAX_Y);

    p->x = clamped_player_x;
    p->y = clamped_player_y;
}
```

Here `update()` doesn't need to have all those temporaries, as it is very
simple. Whereas `update_with_clamping()` does have some logic and therefore
needs named temporaries.

Going further is to avoid using pointers and use _pure functions_.  Letting the
compiler optimize the memory copies out.

```java
struct player {
    int x, y;
}

struct player update_with_clamping(struct player p, int dx, int dy) {
    int new_player_x = p.x + dx;
    int new_player_y = p.y + dy;

    int clamped_player_x = middle(MIN_X, new_player_x, MAX_X);
    int clamped_player_y = middle(MIN_Y, new_player_y, MAX_Y);

    struct player new_player = p;
    new_player.x = clamped_player_x;
    new_player.y= clamped_player_y;

    return new_player;
}

void main(...) {
    struct player p;
    // ...
    p = update_with_clamping(p, dx, dy);
    // ...
}
```

The trick is to initialize the whole struct with the previous version `struct
player new_player = p;` which enables to add fields and have them handled
everywhere.

The compiler is effective to optimize, but is often limited by compilation
units.  So this trick doesn't work well if multiple `.c` are used. Unless
`-flto` is leveraged.
{: .panel .note }

### Units & Encoding are Meaningful

For every quantity that has a unit, always suffix with that unit. For every
variable that has an encoding, always suffix with that encoding.

The following code looks now obviously wrong

```java
    double delay_ms = 1000;
    double frequency_hz = 1 / delay_ms;
```

It should be fixed as


```java
    double delay_ms = 1000;
    double frequency_hz = 1000 / delay_ms;
```

It also works with encoding.

```perl
    my $value = 1000;
    my $value_hex = sprintf "%x", $value;
```

## Some History - Name change from 1SLOC to 1OPS

I got some remarks that we can span to multiple lines therefore enabling
multiple operations. This is actually discouraged as we saw. Therefore, I
renamed the rule to __1OPS__.
